# ZEVO: The Other ZFS on OSX #

Don Brady, formerly of a twenty year tenure of software engineering at Apple, started [a company](http://tenscomplement.com/) to provide Z410, a commercially supported version of ZFS technology for Mac OS.

Don's prior work at Apple had repeatedly redefined Apple's storage strategy.  He was on the original HFS+ team in the 1990s, and later was one of two intrepid and visionary originators of the skunkworks port of ZFS to Mac OS.  His work at Apple was the spiritual progenitor of the MacZFS project, which may not otherwise have exist as we know it for quite some time.

Ten's Complement originally described itself as "an open source company", promising many times in public (Twitter, etc) to publish all of the source code of the product.  He claimed to have been working closely with the Illumos community, while he decided how to handle the specific licensing terms of their impending code release.  [Here is a detailed Ars Technica article](http://arstechnica.com/apple/news/2011/03/how-zfs-is-slowly-making-its-way-to-mac-os-x.ars) about the company, interviewing Don, and mentioning MacZFS at the end.

As the very existence of any competing efforts to port ZFS to Mac OS would naturally be called into question, the optimism behind this corporate free software champion was enough to put a total chilling effect upon the already-slow development of MacZFS while the community awaited the imminent release of a then-vastly superior code base.  Many of us were active beta testers of the product since the beginning, and were openly enthusiastic due to the promise of source code.

The ZFS community does not zealously demand source code for the sake of having it.  Nor does it request source code only out of a sense of social justice amongst all those who had already received free ZFS source code from Sun, who handed us our data storage livelihoods on a free silver platter.  In fact, the source code is pragmatically essential to the very viability of ZFS as a data integrity technology.  The very purpose of ZFS's existence is to bring authoritative legitimacy to the concept of atomic data integrity.  To prove and justify any legitimacy of the atomic operations of any software, requires unrestricted access to its source code.  This is illustrated in [this FAQ entry](FAQ#I've_never_had_any_corruption,_so_is_ZFS_really_necessary?.md).

After roughly a year of development, Ten's Complement made its first external release in March, 2011, as a limited public beta -- in binary form only.  The source code to these betas was explicitly offered by the company in its included documentation, as per the requirements of the CDDL.  The source code was requested by countless recipients via the dedicated email address of cddl@tenscomplement.com, but was apparently never issued to anyone.

Those requests for any particular past versions, are still outstanding and are legally valid.

Then, Ten's Complement was purchased by GreenBytes, and the Z410 product was renamed to ZEVO.  The concept of an open source culture to support the product, vanished with their inexplicably unceremonious [source code](https://github.com/roddi/ZCE-CDDL-FILES) dump on a forum, in response to one (of many) user's requests.  [Read here](https://groups.google.com/d/msg/zfs-macos/WJ3JFIIchfQ/X4VNXdZWTw4J) the MacZFS team's analysis of GreenBytes's source code dump, which follows the letter but defies the spirit of free software.  Their commercially released product has taken the free ZFS and made it decidedly non-free, and has deliberately disabled its functionality according to their idea (explicitly stated on their web site) of how users and their systems should behave and how free software should be productized, commercially tiered, and unilaterally monetized.

If the source code situation was ever to change, of course the MacZFS community would gladly take up collaborative efforts with any commercial effort.  In the meantime, the MacZFS team has made new recruits and has [resumed development with new ambitions](https://github.com/zfs-osx).